blog: node: device manager graduation to GA (#37466)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2022-11-21-devicemanager-ga.md/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.26: Device Manager graduates to GA'

> date: 2022-11-21 ## TODO: Fix this to assigned date

Reviewer: Highlighting this TODO

Reviewer 2: The date has to change?

Reviewer 3: Hi @swatisehgal 
You will be contacted by release comms with the publishing date after the article deadline has passed.

Author: [1.26 tracker board](https://github.com/orgs/kubernetes/projects/98/views/11?sortedBy%5Bdirection%5D=asc&sortedBy%5BcolumnId%5D=22229692&groupedBy%5BcolumnId%5D=15217749&filterQuery=enhancements-status%3ATracked+blog-status%3A%22Ready+for+Review%22) was updated with the publication date of this blog post (Dec 19, 2022). I have updated this PR to capture that.

     into its allocation decisions. The `DeviceManager` will call out to a
     plugin at pod admission time asking for a preferred device allocation
     of a given size from a list of available devices to make a more informed
     decision. E.g. Specifying inter-device constraints to indicate preferrence
     on best-connected set of devices when allocating devices to a container.
  1. `PreStartContainer` is called before each container start if indicated by
     device plugins during registration phase. It allows Device Plugins to run device
     specific operations on the Devices requested. E.g. reconfiguring or
     reprogramming FPGAs before the container starts running. 

Pull Requests that introduced these changes are here:
1. [Invoke preStart RPC call before container start, if desired by plugin](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/58282)
1. [Add GetPreferredAllocation() call to the v1beta1 device plugin API](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/92665)

With introduction of the above endpoints the interaction between Device Manager in
kubelet and Device Manager can be shown as below:

> {{< figure src="deviceplugin-framework-overview.svg" alt="Device Plugin Framework Figure" class="diagram-large" caption="Device Plugin Framework Overview" link="https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/11/21/devicemanager-graduates-to-GA/" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="deviceplugin-framework-overview.svg" alt="Representation of the Device Plugin framework showing the relationship between the kubelet and a device plugin" class="diagram-large" caption="Device Plugin framework overview" >}}
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.

### Change in semantics of device plugin registration process 
Device plugin code was refactored to separate 'plugin' package under the `devicemanager`
package to lay the groundwork for introducing a `v1beta2` device plugin API. This would
allow adding support in `devicemanager` to service multiple device plugin APIs at the
same time.

With this refactoring work, it is now mandatory for a device plugin to start serving its gRPC
service before registering itself with kubelet. Previously, these two operations were asynchornous
and device plugin could register itself before starting its gRPC server which is no longer the
case. For more details, refer to [PR #109016](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/109016) and [Issue #112395](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112395).

### Dynamic resource allocation

> In Kubernetes 1.26, inspired by how [Persistent Volumes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes) are handled in Kubernetes, [Dynamic Resource Allocation](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation.md) has been introduced to cater to devices that have more sophisticated resource requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes 1.26, inspired by how [Persistent Volumes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes)
are handled in Kubernetes, [Dynamic Resource Allocation](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/)
has been introduced to cater to devices that have more sophisticated resource requirements
```

The hyperlink to `/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation.md` is wrong; I fixed that as well as wrapping the text (friendlier to localization teams).

Author: Thanks, fixed.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.26: Device Manager graduates to GA'

> date: 2022-12-19

Reviewer: The path `content/en/blog/_posts/2022-11-21-devicemanager-ga.md/index.md` doesn't match the date here.

It'd be nice to fix that. The correct publication date is 2022-12-19.

Author: Good catch, Thanks!

slug: devicemanager-ga
---

**Author:** Swati Sehgal (Red Hat)

> The Device Plugin framework was introduced in Kubernetes v1.8 release as a vendor

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
The Device Plugin framework was introduced in the Kubernetes v1.8 release as a vendor
```

independent framework to enable discovery, advertisement and allocation of external
devices without modifying core Kubernetes. The feature graduated to Beta in v1.10.
With the recent release of Kubernetes v1.26, Device Manager is now generally
available (GA).

> Device Manager in kubelet facilitates communication with device plugins over gRPC

Reviewer: (nit)
I'd write:
```suggestion
Within the kubelet, the Device Manager facilitates communication with device plugins using gRPC
```

through Unix sockets. Device Manager and Device plugins both act as gRPC servers
and clients by serving and connecting to the exposed gRPC services respectively.
Device plugins serve a gRPC service that kubelet connects to for device discovery,
advertisement (as extended resources) and allocation. Device Manager connects to
the `Registration` gRPC service served by kubelet to register itself with kubelet.

Please refer to the documentation for an [example](/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/device-plugins/#example-pod) on how a pod can request a device exposed to the cluster by a device plugin.

> Here are some device plugins for example implmentations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some example implementations of device plugins:
```

(fixing a spelling error too: “implmentations”)

Author: Thanks, fixed.

> - [NVIDIA device plugin for Kubernetes](https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-device-plugin)
> - [Collection of Intel device plugins for Kubernetes](https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes)
> - [SRIOV network device plugin for Kubernetes](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/sriov-network-device-plugin)
> - [AMD GPU device plugin](https://github.com/RadeonOpenCompute/k8s-device-plugin)

Reviewer: Alphabetical order, please:
```suggestion
- [AMD GPU device plugin](https://github.com/RadeonOpenCompute/k8s-device-plugin)
- Collection of [Intel device plugins for Kubernetes](https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes)
- [NVIDIA device plugin for Kubernetes](https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-device-plugin)
- [SRIOV network device plugin for Kubernetes](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/sriov-network-device-plugin)
```

Another option is a fair random ordering. Alphabetical order is easier though!

Author: I had ordered them by number of stars on github previously, changed to alphabetical order. Thanks!

     reprogramming FPGAs before the container starts running. 

Pull Requests that introduced these changes are here:
1. [Invoke preStart RPC call before container start, if desired by plugin](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/58282)
1. [Add GetPreferredAllocation() call to the v1beta1 device plugin API](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/92665)

With introduction of the above endpoints the interaction between Device Manager in
kubelet and Device Manager can be shown as below:

{{< figure src="deviceplugin-framework-overview.svg" alt="Representation of the Device Plugin framework showing the relationship between the kubelet and a device plugin" class="diagram-large" caption="Device Plugin framework Overview" >}}

### Change in semantics of device plugin registration process 
Device plugin code was refactored to separate 'plugin' package under the `devicemanager`
package to lay the groundwork for introducing a `v1beta2` device plugin API. This would
allow adding support in `devicemanager` to service multiple device plugin APIs at the
same time.

With this refactoring work, it is now mandatory for a device plugin to start serving its gRPC

> service before registering itself with kubelet. Previously, these two operations were asynchornous

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
service before registering itself with kubelet. Previously, these two operations were asynchronous
```

Author: Fixed, Thanks.

---
layout: blog

> title: 'Kubernetes 1.26: Graduation of Device Manager to GA!'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Kubernetes 1.26: Device Manager graduates to GA'
```

> date: 2021-11-21

Reviewer: We should change this to the assigned date once we know it.

Author: Sure, I will mark it as a TODO for now till we have more information. I assumed that this would be the date this was written and put that date here.

slug: graduation-of-devicemanager-to-GA
---

**Author:** Swati Sehgal (Red Hat)

> ##  Quick Intro to the Device Plugin framework
> 
> ### Introduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We avoid starting articles with a heading. It's OK to jump straight in to introductory text.

Please adjust other headings to match.

> Device Plugin framework was introduced in Kubernetes v1.8 release as a vendor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Device Plugin framework was introduced in Kubernetes v1.8 release as a vendor
```

independent framework to enable discovery, advertisement and allocation of external
devices without modifying core Kubernetes. The feature graduated to Beta in v1.10.

> Due to its widespread use and adoption, this feature is being graduated to GA in
> v1.26.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the recent release of Kubernetes v1.26, Device Plugins are now generally
available (GA).
```

Device Manager in Kubelet facilitates communication with device plugins over gRPC
through Unix sockets. Device Manager and Device plugins both act as gRPC servers
and clients by serving and connecting to the exposed gRPC services respectively.
Device plugins serve a gRPC service that Kubelet connects to for device discovery,
advertisement (as extended resources) and allocation. Device Manager connects to

> the `Registration` gRPC service served by Kubelet to register itself with Kubelet.

Reviewer: Please write kubelet (lower case)

Author: Ack, Thanks. Will update.

> ### Pod requesting a device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
````

Please refer to the documentation for an [example](/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/device-plugins/#example-pod) on how a pod can request a device exposed to the cluster by a device plugin.

> ### Example Device Plugin implmentations 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Selection of Device Plugin implementations
```

Here are some device plugins for example implmentations:
- [NVIDIA device plugin for Kubernetes](https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-device-plugin)
- [Collection of Intel device plugins for Kubernetes](https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes)
- [SRIOV network device plugin for Kubernetes](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/sriov-network-device-plugin)
- [AMD GPU device plugin](https://github.com/RadeonOpenCompute/k8s-device-plugin)

## Noteworthy developments since Device Plugin framework introduction

### Kubelet APIs moved to kubelet staging repo
External facing `deviceplugin` API packages moved from `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/apis/`
to `k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/` in v1.17. Refer to [Move external facing kubelet apis to staging](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/83551) for more details on the rationale behind this change.

### Device Plugin API updates
Additional gRPC endpoints introduced:
  1. `GetDevicePluginOptions` is used by device plugins to communicate
     options to the `DeviceManager` in order to indicate if `PreStartContainer`

>      or `GetPreferredAllocation` calls are supported and can be called before

Reviewer 5: this is correct. IIRC, `GetDevicePluginOptions` is also meant to cover future extension (I'll doublecheck the code/KEP), so it can worthy to write down that future optional calls will also be covered here.

Author: Yeah, that's right. This endpoint can cover other future extensions too. Will capture that.

Reviewer 5: great. IMO few words to hint this are sufficient, no need for lengthy description.

     making devices available to the container.
  1. `GetPreferredAllocation` allows a device plugin to forward allocation

>      preferrence to the `DeviceManager` so it can incorporate this information

Reviewer 5: I'd explictely call out that (IIRC) we are talking about NUMA-locality for preferred allocation

Author: My understanding of `GetPrefferedAllocation` endpoint is that once the set of devices suitable for assignment based on NUMA-locality have been identified, this endpoint gives a chance to the device plugin to weigh in on the final allocation decision. The preference can be NUMA-locality specific but doesn't have to be, it could be some device specific preference not related to NUMA. @klueska It would be great to get your input on this and in general on this blog post.

Reviewer 5: I can be (partially) wrong indeed. What I'm trying to suggest is to be a bit more concrete re: what the preference entails, again IMO no need for lengthy description, just few words to set the direction.

Author: Ack, will update. Thanks

     into its allocation decisions. The `DeviceManager` will call out to a
     plugin at pod admission time asking for a preferred device allocation
     of a given size from a list of available devices to make a more informed
     decision.
  1. `PreStartContainer` is called before each container start if indicated by
     device plugins during registration phase. It allows Device Plugins to run device

>      specific operations on the Devices requested.

Reviewer 5: we should have examples of this specific operations (if memory serves, device reset?). If we have easily available examples, e.g. in the KEP or doc, we should probably list some them here.

Author: Sure, we can mention reconfiguring or reprogramming FPGAs before the container starts as a use case here.

Pull Requests that introduced these changes are here:
1. [Invoke preStart RPC call before container start, if desired by plugin](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/58282)
1. [Add GetPreferredAllocation() call to the v1beta1 device plugin API](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/92665)

With introduction of the above endpoints the interaction between Device Manager in
Kubelet and Device Manager can be shown as below:

> ![Process](deviceplugin-framework-overview.png)

Reviewer: Use a [figure](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure) shortcode here if you can.

### Change in semantics of device plugin registration process 
Device plugin code was refactored to separate 'plugin' package under the `devicemanager`
package to lay the groundwork for introducing a `v1beta2` device plugin API. This would
allow adding support in `devicemanager` to service multiple device plugin APIs at the
same time.

With this refactoring work, it is now mandatory for a device plugin to start serving its gRPC
service before registering itself with Kubelet. Previously, these two operations were asynchornous
and device plugin could register itself before starting its gRPC server which is no longer the
case. For more details, refer to [PR #109016](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/109016) and [Issue #112395](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112395).

### Dynamic resource allocation

> In Kubernetes 1.26, inspired by how [Persistent Volumes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes) are handled in Kubernetes, [Dynamic Resource Allocation](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation) has been introduced to cater to devices that have more sophisticated resource requirements

Reviewer: This should link to the _documentation_ for Dynamic Resource Allocation, not the KEP. You might need to liaise within SIG Node to find out what URL path that documentation has on the _dev-1.26_ branch.

Author: @pohly Would be great to get your input here. I am pointing to `/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation.md` to point to the Dynamic Resource Allocation documenation based on the files I see being populated here https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/37766.

like:
1. Decouple device initialization and allocation from the pod lifecycle.
1. Facilitate dynamic sharing of devices between containers and pods.
1. Support custom resource-specific parameters
1. Enable resource-specific setup and cleanup actions
1. Enable support for Network-attached resources, not just node-local resources

## Is the Device Plugin API stable now?

> No, the Device Plugin API is still not stable, the latest Device Plugin API version 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No, the Device Plugin API is still not stable; the latest Device Plugin API version
```

available is `v1beta1`. There are plans in the community to introduce `v1beta2` API
to service multiple plugin APIs at once. A per-API call with request/response types would allow adding support for
newer API versions without explicitly bumping the API.

In addition to that, there are existing proposals in the community to introduce additional endpoints [KEP-3162: Add Deallocate and PostStopContainer to Device Manager API](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/109016).

> For more details, refer to the slack thread [here](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C0BP8PW9G/p1667481109075849).

Reviewer: It's not really reasonable to expect readers to be members of Kubernetes' Slack workspace. Instead, summarize the reasons.

If there is an ambition to stabilize the API for Device Plugins, outline that ambition.

Author: I have summarized most of the relevant information here already but thought it would nice to put the reference to where the discussion happened. I will remove the link to the slack thread as you rightly pointed out not everyone will be member of the slack workspace.
